
Proj1
Eli Dow

Overview:


Acknowledgements: TAs August and Tanya


Purpose: The purpose of Proj1 is to implement a structure that organizes
        DNA sequences in a tree like structure. These sequences not only
        must be inserted into and removed from the structure, but certain
        requests should retrieve information.


Files:

Name: main.cpp
Description:    This file is the main driver. It reads the requests from the query
            file and uses a Trie object to execute those commands. It returns
            any outputs to the output file given.

Name: Trie.h
Description:    Trie.h contains declarations and descriptions of all
             the trie functions and attributes, including any 
             helper functions. It also includes a node struct.

Name: Trie.cpp
Description:    Trie.cpp contains all of the functions of
             Trie that were implemented. The Trie is constructed by
             a node, that has a character, with four pointers and a bool.
             Here is the implementations of the main functions along with 
             helpers. I also created a constructor and a destuctor.

Name: Makefile
Description:    Makefile for program.


How to compile and run the program:

Compiled: make main
Run: ./main [query file] [output location]


Data Structures and Algorithms:

    I used a Trie to implement this project. A trie is a good structure for
organizing words by breaking up the character to different nodes. An expanded
explanation and algorithms for each major function is quesion 1 of specifics.

Details and Explanation of Testing:

    I tested my code by using a testing.cpp file. I also used print and 
contains functions in Trie. In the specifics section, I go into more depth 
about both.



Specifics:


(1) What data structures will you be using for this project, and why
were those choices made? If using more than one data structure, how will they
interact? If you are modifying a known data structure, what changes will you
 be making and why?

I will be using a Trie to implement this project. Tries are tree-like
structures because they have a linked set of nodes, where each node contains an
array of child pointers. A trie is a very effective data structure for this
project because we can organize words or sequences by splitting up the
characters into separate nodes. Given a sequence, each letter is a parent to 
the letter that comes after it, and all of the descendants of a node
have a common prefix. 

Each node will have information(string of characters), typical of any trie.
One important feature to this data structure is it would have a common root so
that when a sequence is inserted, it will be automatically placed in one of the
root’s children. Beside its info and a common root, each node will have four 
pointers because each one represents a possible character of the 
sequence: A, C, G, and T. It is contained in an array so it is easy to iterate
through the four. If the node is pointing to NULL for a specific letter, then 
there is nothing there. Also, every node has a EndofWord boolean value that is 
true if it marks the end of a word that was inserted.


(2) How do you plan on solving insert, query and remove requests?

insert:
    Insert passes a string(initially full sequence) and a node(initially root).
It recursively traverses through the tree until the string is empty. If the root
is NULL or the letter of the sequence being inserted is NULL, it creates the 
space. The function's base case is when the sequence is empty(no more letters).
For question marks, it recursively calls the funciton four times.

query:
    Query passes a node, a string(sequence), and a prefix(starts as null).
It recursively traverses the trie until it reaches a point where the prefix is
different. At that point it returns the closest match, and that is calculated
in the public function. I ran out of time, so it does not have question marks 
or asterisks.

remove:
    Remove has two cases. If the sequence is not in the trie, it returns not 
found. Otherwise, it passes a node, its parent, and the sequence to find the 
end of the word. Using recursion, once it finds the end, it deletes the node if
it has no children, otherwise it changes the bool value. Also, this works for 
question marks, but the return statement is off; I did not have time to fix it.
Everything it outputs is true, it is just unneccessary. There are no asterisks.


(3) Why do you think your solution is a good solution to this project? How are
 space and time concerns addressed?

 It is a good solution because tries shorten time of insert/search. To clear
 space, when I removed a node, I had a function called post order delete destroy
 the memory.



(a) Names of individuals or sources you consulted for help.
    
    Individuals are listed at the top, and I used the Trie simulator online.

(b) A description of each class you wrote.
    
    Described in overview.


(c) What is the overall time complexity of the solution? 
That is, how long does it take to make a query?

    It takes the number of operations as the height of the closest match.


(d) What is the overall space complexity of the solution?

    The issue with a trie is that it creates a lot of NULL pointers.


(e) How to compile/run your program.

    Described in overview.


(f) A description of how each piece of your code was tested.

I tested each function of my trie in a testing.cpp file. In order to see what I 
was doing, I would create cerr lines before every call of a function. I also 
created a contains function to make sure a paticular word was in the trie, and 
a print_trie function to print out all of the words to the trie. Both these 
functions(in Trie.cpp) were called to check the Trie after other functions were
called. For the big 3 functions, I would create test files with different edge
cases.




